RHDEVDOCS-5221: Overview of Pipelines (#59556)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/op-components.adoc

// This module is included in the following assembly:
//
// *openshift_pipelines/understanding-openshift-pipelines.adoc

:_content-type: CONCEPT
[id="op-components_{context}"]
= Components of {pipelines-title}

{pipelines-title} is a comprehensive solution for automating CI/CD processes, such as building, testing, and deploying code, in a cloud-native way.

> With {pipelines-shortname}, you can use custom {product-title} resources to configure your process as a set of “building blocks” that run in containers and pods on {product-title}.

Author: I don't understand removal of the variable here.

> With {pipelines-shortname}, you can use custom {product-title} resources to configure your process as a set of “building blocks” that run in containers and pods on {product-title}.

Reviewer: @mramendi please retain the variable..  my bad! it is a typo when I copied it from my text pad as I was trying to reword it.

> There are several ways to access reusable “building blocks” as well as create your own.

Author: "Components" also refers to things like Resolvers and Results. It's not a great heading. It's beacuse "Overview" is banned and "Concepts" is already uses and I have to have something for 1.11 (for 1.12 I hope to rework the entire assembly).

"Building blocks" or just "blocks" are only pipelines and tasks

> There are several ways to access reusable “building blocks” as well as create your own.

Reviewer: If you can use reusable resolvers and they are components then use the word components throughout. That makes more sense.

[id="op-overview-stepstaskspipelines_{context}"]

> == Steps, tasks, and pipelines

Author: A big rewrite is not a possibility in this timeframe - it was hard enough to get this one agreed.

> The most basic “building block” of the Pipelines CI/CD process is the _step_. A step is single operation, such as running some unit tests for a Python web app, or the compilation of a Java program. Tekton performs each step in a separate container

Author: I intentionally want to leave this ambiguous as the brief overview is not the place to discuss best design practice. I will reword to make the ambiguity clearer.

> The most basic “building block” of the Pipelines CI/CD process is the _step_. A step is single operation, such as running some unit tests for a Python web app, or the compilation of a Java program. Tekton performs each step in a separate container

Author: see above

> The most basic “building block” of the Pipelines CI/CD process is the _step_. A step is single operation, such as running some unit tests for a Python web app, or the compilation of a Java program. Tekton performs each step in a separate container

Reviewer: Overview when it must be simple it must also be clear with no ambiguity. Thanks for rewording.

> The smallest block of the Pipelines CI/CD process is the _step_. A step is single operation, such as running one or several unit tests for a Python web application or a Java program compilation. {pipelines-title} performs each step in a separate container.

Reviewer: Inconsistency in the article usage. LGTM, trusting you will correct this.

> The smallest block of the Pipelines CI/CD process is the _step_. A step is single operation, such as running one or several unit tests for a Python web application or a Java program compilation. {pipelines-title} performs each step in a separate container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The smallest block of the Pipelines CI/CD process is a _step_. A step is a single operation, such as running one or several unit tests for a Python web application or a Java program compilation. {pipelines-title} performs each step in a separate container.
```

> A _task_ is a collection of steps, which always run in a fixed sequential order. Pipelines runs all steps of a task as containers in the same {product-title} pod, which can provide a shared environment for the steps. For example, you can mount a volume in a task, and it is accessible inside each step of the task.

Author: I am intentionally describing concepts not just resources that represent them. I tried to clarify this.

> A _task_, represented by a `Task` resource, is a collection of steps, which always run in a fixed sequential order. {pipelines-title} runs all steps of a task as containers in the same pod. This pod provides an environment that enables steps to access shared resources. For example, you can mount a volume in a task, and and each step of the task can access this volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _task_, represented by a `Task` resource, is a collection of steps, which always run in a fixed sequential order. {pipelines-title} runs all steps of a task as containers in the same pod. This pod provides an environment that enables steps to access shared resources. For example, you can mount a volume in a task, and each step of the task can access this volume.
```

A _pipeline_, represented by a `Pipeline` resource, is a collection of tasks. You can arrange tasks in a pipeline in a flexible order, so some tasks can run in parallel as well as sequentially, depending on the pipeline definition. You can also control the execution of tasks in a pipeline in various ways, for example, specify a condition for a task to proceed, define an automatic retry if a task fails, and so on.

> Custom parameters are supported at every level. You can define a task with custom parameters and use the values of these parameters in steps. You must then set the values of such parameters when including the task in a pipeline. In turn, a pipeline can have custom parameters.

Author: Definitely not. The task can have parameters and a pipeline sets them; the pipeline itself has different parameters. The real problem here is that the pipeline run sets the parameter values for a pipeline but the pipeline run is not yet defined in the text. I'll try to write around this though.

.Example diagram of steps and tasks in a pipeline
image::338_OpenShift_Pipeline_0523.png[A diagram representing a pipeline. Task A runs first and includes three steps. When task A completes, task B and task C both start; each of these tasks has two steps. Task D starts when both task B and task C complete; this task has one step.]

{pipelines-shortname} specifies tasks and pipelines as custom OpenShift resources.

Typically, you configure a complete CI/CD process as a pipeline, while logical parts of this process become tasks.

[id="op-overview-runs_{context}"]
== Task runs and pipeline runs

`PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` custom resources represent individual runs of a pipeline or a task.

{pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a pipeline when you create a `PipelineRun` custom resource referring to an existing pipeline. {pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a task when you create a `TaskRun` custom resource referring to an existing task.

The `PipelineRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the pipeline has. The `TaskRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the task has.

[id="op-overview-triggers_{context}"]

> == Triggers, trigger bindings, trigger templates, event listeners, interceptors

Author: Again the header is about concepts not just resources

Of course, manually creating `PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` resources is not the only way to run pipelines and tasks. Oftentimes, you will want to run a CI/CD pipeline automatically when a certain event (such as a Git repository push) happens. {pipelines-shortname} provides triggers to supports this functionality.

The following components implement a trigger:

* A `TriggerTemplate` custom resource specifies a “blueprint” for a `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun`, including the parameters that must be set for the pipeline or task.
* A `TriggerBinding` custom resource specifies the mapping of fields in an event payload to parameters in a `TriggerTemplate` resource.
* A `Trigger` custom resource specifies a trigger template and a trigger binding.

> * An `EventListener` Kubernetes object is an addressable sink that runs in the OpenShift cluster, listens for events as a Webhook on a specified port, and specifies one or more Triggers.

Author: No. An Event Listener is not a resource as far as I am aware.

When an Event Listener receives an event, {pipelines-shortname} automatically creates a `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` based on the `TriggerTemplate`, setting the parameters from the event payload according to the `TriggerBinding`. The creation of this resource, in turn, causes the pipeline or task to run.

Optionally, youc an define an `Interceptor` custom resource. An interceptor defines the logic that runs every time any event is received through the event listeer, before this event is processed using a trigger. The interceptor can verify, filter, and modify events.

[id="op-overview-catalog_{context}"]
== Pipelines Catalog, Artifact Hub, Tekton Hub

A _Pipelines catalog_ is a repository of Pipelines building blocks, including tasks, pipelines, trigger templates, and trigger bindings. You can download these blocks, install them on your cluster, and use them in your pipelines.

You can use the community-sourced Pipelines catalog indexed by the Artifact Hub and Tekton Hub projects.

[id="op-overview-resolvers_{context}"]
== Resolvers

> _Resolvers_ are a way to retrieve tasks and pipelines from a repository by an identifier. You can reference a task or pipeline using a resolver instead of defining the task or pipeline in your custom refources. At run time, {pipelines-shortname} retrieves and runs the task or pipeline.

Author: "use by using"?

> Use _resolvers_ to retrieve tasks and pipelines from a repository by an identifier. You can reference a task or pipeline using a resolver instead of defining the task or pipeline in your custom resources. When the task or pipeline must be run, {pipelines-shortname} retrieves and runs the task or pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With _resolvers_, you can retrieve tasks and pipelines from a repository by using an identifier. You can reference a task or pipeline by using a resolver instead of defining the task or pipeline in your CRs. When the task or pipeline must be run, {pipelines-shortname} retrieves and runs the task or pipeline.
```
Instead of defining the task or pipeline in your CRs, are you referencing a task or a pipeline **that is** using a resolver, or are you referencing a task or a pipeline **by using** a resolver? Do you see how the writing conveys different meanings and is resulting in ambiguity and confusion for the reader?? 

Read both sentences carefully, understand what we need to exactly convey to the reader, and accordingly, rewrite for clarity.

> * _Hub resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline from the Pipelines Catalog available on the Artifact Hub or Tekton Hub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Hub resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline from the Pipelines Catalog available on the Artifact Hub or Tekton Hub.
```
Do not miss **the period**.

> * _Bundles resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline from a Tekton bundle, which is an OCI image available from any OCI repository including an OpenShift image registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Bundles resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline from a Tekton bundle, which is an Open Container Initiative (OCI) image available from any OCI repository including an OpenShift image registry.
```
expand OCI.

* _Cluster resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline that is already created on the same OpenShift cluster in a specific namespace.

* _Git resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline definition from a Git repository. You must specify the repository, the branch, and the path.

[id="op-overview-clustertasks_{context}"]
== Cluster tasks and cluster trigger bindings

When you install {pipelines-shortname}, the installation creates a certain number of `ClusterTask` and `ClusterTriggerBinding` CRs. These resources represent pre-arranged tasks and trigger bindings that you can use in your pipelines.

Cluster tasks and cluster trigger bindings are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead, you can configure the hub resolver to access a wide array of reusable components.

[id="op-overview-chains_{context}"]
== {tekton-chains}: signed storage of runs for security audit

Any automatic process involving data from repositories is a potential security issue, because a repository might be compromised.

> To monitor and mitigate any possible security issues, {pipelines-shortname} provides {tekton-chains}, a method of storing the full contents of every task run and pipeline run, including any data (such as mounted volumes) that was processed in the run. This storage is signed by a key, so that any tampering with the storage is evident.

Reviewer: @mramendi [Same comment](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/59556#discussion_r1228061710) again. what is actually signed by a key -- storage or data?
I am sure it is the data here. Be consistent with the words you use, so the reader does not get confused.

See the following lines written by you: "The full execution data of every task run and pipeline run, including run specs and logs, **is stored** in the `TaskRun` and `PipelineRun` CRs and **can be signed and stored** in a repository with {tekton-chains}."

{pipelines-shortname} provides Tekton Results, an API and command line interface for querying execution and result data in a flexible way.

[id="op-overview-pac_{context}"]
== Pipelines as Code: running a pipeline from Git source

With the Pipelines as Code functionality, you can define your CI/CD pipeline in your Git source code repository.

Inside a directory in your source code, you define a template for the PipelineRun resource. This template includes the pipeline with all the necessary tasks. You also register the repository with {pipelines-shortname} using a Kubernetes custom resource and configure Git event notification using a web hook. If you use a Github repository, the Pipelines as Code installation routine can create a Github application for your repository that implements the notification.

> When events that you define in the template happen, {pipelines-shortname} runs the CI/CD pipeline defined in the source code. You can change this definition as necessary in your code, without separate actions to reconfigure {pipelines-shortname}.

Author: Well, maybe you'll like the new one better - not really sure how to make this idea clearer.

> You can maintain this definition in your code repository, making changes as necessary, without any modification to {pipelines-shortname} resources.

Reviewer: I love the change and rewrite. Super Misha.
Keep this together. Else, when you say 'this` definition, continuity is lost for the reader.

[id="op-overview-stepstaskspipelines_{context}"]
== Steps, tasks, and pipelines

The smallest block of the Pipelines CI/CD process is a _step_. A step is a single operation, such as running one or several unit tests for a Python web application or a Java program compilation. {pipelines-title} performs each step in a separate container.

A _task_, represented by a `Task` resource, is a collection of steps, which always run in a fixed sequential order. {pipelines-title} runs all steps of a task as containers in the same pod. This pod provides an environment that enables steps to access shared resources. For example, you can mount a volume in a task, and each step of the task can access this volume.

A _pipeline_, represented by a `Pipeline` resource, is a collection of tasks. You can arrange tasks in a pipeline in a flexible order so some tasks can run in parallel or sequentially, depending on the pipeline definition. You can also control the execution of tasks in a pipeline in various ways, for example, specify a condition for a task to proceed, define an automatic retry if a task fails, and so on.

.Example diagram of steps and tasks in a pipeline

> image::338_OpenShift_Pipeline_0523.png[A diagram representing a pipeline. Task A runs first and includes three steps. When task A completes, task B and task C both start; each of these tasks has two steps. Task D starts when both task B and task C complete; this task has one step.]

Reviewer 3: This is a great explanation, but I am not sure it is fully reflected in the diagram above. Is it possible to speak with Jess Schaefer about making this a bit clearer - so that it is clear that both tasks have to complete, to start task D. Also , what happens if just on task completes but the other does not ?

Typically, you configure a complete CI/CD process as a pipeline, while logical parts of this process become tasks.

[id="op-overview-runs_{context}"]
== Task runs and pipeline runs

`PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` custom resources (CRs) represent individual runs of a pipeline or a task.

{pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a pipeline when you create a `PipelineRun` custom resource referring to an existing pipeline. {pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a task when you create a `TaskRun` custom resource referring to an existing task.

The `PipelineRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the pipeline has. The `TaskRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the task has.

[id="op-overview-parameters_{context}"]
== Task and pipeline parameters

You can define _parameters_ in both tasks and pipelines.

> When creating a `Task` resource, you can define parameters of the task and use and use the values of these parameters in steps within the task. A `Pipeline` resource that uses this task or a `TaskRun` resource that runs this task must define the values for every parameter of the task.

Reviewer 3: Is it possible to present these a bit differently...

- Parameter as a pipeline ::
- Parameter as a task::

* A `TriggerTemplate` CR specifies a blueprint for a `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resource, including the parameters that must be set for the pipeline or task.
* A `TriggerBinding` CR  extracts the fields from an event payload and stores them as parameters that are defined by a `TriggerTemplate` resource.
* A `Trigger` CR specifies a trigger template and a trigger binding.
* An `EventListener` Kubernetes object is an addressable sink that runs in the cluster, listens for events as a Webhook on a specified port, and specifies one or more Triggers.

When an `EventListener` object receives an event, {pipelines-shortname} automatically creates a `PipelineRun` or `TaskRun` resource based on the `TriggerTemplate` CR, setting the parameters from the event payload according to the `TriggerBinding` CR specification. The creation of this resource causes the pipeline or task to run.

Optionally, you can define an `Interceptor` CR. An interceptor defines the logic that runs every time an event is received through the `EventListener` object, before this event is processed using a trigger. The interceptor can verify, filter, and modify events.

[id="op-overview-catalog_{context}"]

> == Pipelines Catalog, {artifact-hub}, and {tekton-hub}

Reviewer 3: How come we do not use catalog for sentence case?

Typically, you configure a complete CI/CD process as a pipeline, while logical parts of this process become tasks.

[id="op-overview-runs_{context}"]
== Task runs and pipeline runs

`PipelineRun` and `TaskRun` custom resources (CRs) represent individual runs of a pipeline or a task.

{pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a pipeline when you create a `PipelineRun` custom resource referring to an existing pipeline. {pipelines-shortname} automatically runs a task when you create a `TaskRun` custom resource referring to an existing task.

The `PipelineRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the pipeline has. The `TaskRun` resource sets the variable parameters that the task has.

[id="op-overview-parameters_{context}"]
== Task and pipeline parameters

You can define _parameters_ in both tasks and pipelines.

When creating a `Task` resource, you can define parameters of the task and use and use the values of these parameters in steps within the task. A `Pipeline` resource that uses this task or a `TaskRun` resource that runs this task must define the values for every parameter of the task.

> When creating a `Pipeline` resource, you can define parameters of the pipeline and use the values of these parameters in tasks within the pipeline. A `PipelineRun` resource that runs this pipeline must define the values for every parameter of the pipeline.

Reviewer: Love this!! thank you!

* _Cluster resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline that is already created on the same OpenShift cluster in a specific namespace.

* _Git resolver_: Retrieves a task or pipeline definition from a Git repository. You must specify the repository, the branch, and the path.

[id="op-overview-clustertasks_{context}"]
== Cluster tasks and cluster trigger bindings

When you install {pipelines-shortname}, the installation creates a certain number of `ClusterTask` and `ClusterTriggerBinding` CRs. These resources represent pre-arranged tasks and trigger bindings that you can use in your pipelines.

Cluster tasks and cluster trigger bindings are deprecated and will be removed in a future release. Instead, you can configure the hub resolver to access a wide array of reusable components.

[id="op-overview-chains_{context}"]
== {tekton-chains}: signed storage of runs for security audit

Any automatic process involving data from repositories is a potential security issue, because a repository might be compromised.

> To monitor and mitigate any possible security issues, {pipelines-shortname} provides {tekton-chains}, a method of storing the full contents of every task run and pipeline run, including any data (such as mounted volumes) that was processed in the run. The stored information is signed by a key, so that any tampering with the information is evident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To monitor and mitigate any possible security issues, {pipelines-shortname} provides {tekton-chains}, a method of storing the entire content of every task run and pipeline run, including any data (such as mounted volumes) processed in the run. The stored information is signed by a key so that any tampering with the information is evident.
```
